# Why are we building Fairward? 

Most people living in the US have had some experience with our healthcare system where they go in for a procedure or emergency situation and end up with an egregious bill (often weeks or months later) for thousands of dollars or even more. This is because of how each hospital has negotiated specific contracts with each insurance carrier (payor). You can literally get the exact same treatment at hospitals within 20 miles and see a 5x difference in price. As of January 1st, 2021 hospitals are now required to post prices online in a “consumer readable” manner for 300 common medical procedures including lower back MRI, C-Section, heart bypass surgery, knee or hip replacement, ally types of imagine, and many other procedures. Here is an example of how it’s displayed for Sutter hospitals; you can download an excel or CVS file for each location. This comes on the back of data interoperability legislation passed in mid-2020 by the US Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) designed to give patients more access and control of their own health data. Historically healthcare providers and hospitals had separate Electronic Health Record (EHR) software and they weren’t required to share information with each other. These rulings force companies like Epic, Cerner, and all the long-tail EHRs to use modern APIs to share data and provide easy access to consumers, no matter where the data sits.
 
Given the trend towards removing opacity in the healthcare space and trying to make overall healthcare more affordable, there is a wide open door for a startup to continually scrape all hospital and provider sites for updated pricing information and offer consumers a simple price comparison app to determine what care should cost and where they should go to receive it. When you sign up it would take in all of your health insurance information as well as leverage the EHR APIs to access all of your medical records. This could become your one-stop app for all things related to major healthcare decisions. In addition, continually shining a light on the wild pricing differences in care should help make healthcare more transparent and affordable down the road.

Sources:
* [Hospitals must now post prices online \(in consumer-friendly format\). Here’s how you can benefit](https://www.cnbc.com/2021/01/05/hospitals-must-now-post-their-prices-online-how-consumers-may-benefit.html)
* [Healthcare Cost Transparency at Sutter Health](https://www.sutterhealth.org/billing-insurance/costs-and-charges/cost-transparency)